

$Header$

GMTK TODO List/Memory

Other things that need to be done, or just other ideas that might be
incorporated into the package at some point. Things that are already
done are marked with an "X" on the left of the item. When an item is
added, please add the date to the left of the list item. Note that
some items below might be redundant as they were added at very
different time.

--------------------------------------------

X Low level file parser should support
   both integer and named pointers to
   the parameters that they share.
   (when they write out the parameters, they
    should write out the form that was written in).
    
X simple +* equations in decision tree leaf nodes,
  using variables vi and ci (e.g.,
  v0, v1, v2, ... , and c0, c1, c2, ...) for values
  and cardinalities of parent variables.
  exs:  c0*v0 + v1
        c0 + 1
        3

X add a MTCPT type, for deterministic cpt
  which just points to one of the decision trees
  in the DT table.

X add error check message if two low level objects
  have the same name and kill the program.
   
X discrete observed variables have only one cardinality,
  card needs to be a vector.

X Include gaussian objects for special situations.
    index -1 corresponds to, with probability 1, gaussian
    index -2 corresponds to, with probability 0, gaussian

- An anytime clique finding algorithm that searches
  for the best clique tree in an hour, day, weekend, etc.
  Save the resulting clique (and model description) to
  a file so that it can be reused multiple times.

- Produce messages to the user saying that what the clique
  sizes are and that they might want to adjust the 
  structure to reduce clique sizes if they become too large.

- the inference procedure should work both with clique chains and clique trees
    - no, but basic data structures are ok.
    - at some point, add tree stuff, for single frame applications

- the inference procedure should work with disconnected networks

X Allocate data structures for CPTS, etc. automatically, if not explicitly 
  specified in a file. 

- use namedobject for randomvariable and any other object that
  has a string name

X- include check to make sure that names for each section in parms are unique

X- todo, make sure that chunk n:m is valid.

X IMPORTANT: ability to train means and other dlinkmats in a dlinkmats structure
  independently.

- to through and start using setBasicAllocatedBit() on read, and add
  assertions to that effect on all routines that need it.
  (later) started doing this, but need to do a sweep to make sure all use
  this mechanism.

- IMPORTANT: look at and get rid of purify memory lost message
     - write destructors

- write sampling code

X update make file so that -@ works for .o files.
<
X Check the results of all DT query() calls to make sure
  the index it returns is valid. Report great error messages
  if it doesn't.
  Ultimately, some type of run-type check done once at the beginning
  so this query doesn't need to take place.

X if an object gets no probability, do something
  more than just issuing a warning, like setting
  to uniform probs, removing the component,
  re-randomizing, or something.
  done: set to previous values.

X add a k-means mode for initialization.
    - keep covariances at unity for a while.
    - first iteration just use random assignments
      (pick a random component who gives unity probability,
       everyone else gives zero probability)
    - done essentially since the splitting stuff
      is working and we can start with a single Gaussian
      and path counting.

X Add gaussian split program

X add linear BMM links

- add non-linear BMM links

X implement mixture component vanishing using the 
  shared Dense1DPMF. If one GM decides that
  its component should vanish based on a MCVR
  then all of them should (and should check this
  as well).

X when reading in definitions for each utterance:
    we could change the DTs with a particular name
    (e.g., read in a DT file and have a read
     mode that changes the pointer if it is there).
    This would need to have objects that use DTs
    use the integer index rater than the pointer directly.
   Essentially done, DTs can now specify a file
   containing a number of DTs one per segment.

- Re-think the 1 DT per utterance stuff so that
  we can seemlessly do parallelism.
   (dt file indexes?)

- rethink DT format numbering

- add a 'fail' tag to DT leaves.

X pass .str files through cpp before reading.

X make sure that all files passed through cpp that
  line numbering error messages is done right.

X GMTK_GMParms::read(), keeps open all files
  until the end. If it encounters the same name again,
  it keeps track of where it was and continues reading.
  Also, this should append rather than delete.

X Allow the file parser to pass ASCII files through cpp
  (but not binary).

- need to add a check that makes sure that the observation
  range used by the cont. parents match that used by
  the gaussian, perhaps add a length check as well.

- Fri Jun 15 12:43:49 2001, 
  MEMORY SAVINGS:
  RandomVariables and their discrete and continuous children
  have lots of redundant information when they are unrolled, thereby
  wasting lots of memory. This could be changed so that
  RV's keep a pointer to a RV common structure which when the RV is cloned
  uses the same common data.

- Short term: evaulate float/double for logp on Aurora

X Long term: 
     have a log space algorithm option

- in file parser, add checks to make sure that all ints read in
  are non-negative

X change parser to keep track of multiple #include files via line directives

X change sparse PMF so that it just contains a list
  of values, and then a pointer to a dense pmf

X get the parameter writing stuff finalized.
   (get working after workshop, use simple global write in binary for now).

X get MCVR working

- if last component (or entire mixture) has no probability, 
   either 1) die
          2) do nothing, and do not change anything, reverting
             to previous values.
          2) force to uniform parameters
          3) For now, **** force to impossible Gaussian *** 
             and issue a loud warning.

- prior counts
    - need routine makeAccumulatorsPrior
    - stand alone program for writing out accumulator file to be read in.

X IMPORTANT: finish load/store/accumulate accumulators

- Identify potential issues with release (ie.., bugs, slowness, obviously needed toolkit abilities,
  thigns that are inconvenient, etc.).

X add VCID everywhere.

- allow deterministic relations to be enumerated out. in some cases, this is
  easier than a decision tree. 

X- add a binary/ascii parameter file conversion program.

- export all internal program variables to command line (e.g., var floor, etc)

X check on memory leak stuff

- make sure that all gaussians use means/variances that are the right dimensionality
  in read file.

- rethink sparse CPT and make it such that sparseCPTs don't use the Dense1DPMF which
  have become tailored to Gaussian mixtures (so lengths might change).
   sparse CPTs should use dense CPTs somehow.

- write C++ program to print number of free parameters for a system.

- add simple multiplication onto decision tree leafs. (or better, make it
  use real integer formulas with parens, etc.).

- export the optional training stuff (i.e., don't train means, just covars, etc)
  to command line.

- create new objects, integer to name mappings
  to map to decision tree leaves (corresponding to integers) to either
     1) Gaussian mixture objects
     2) Switching gaussian mixture objects
     3) sparse PMFs

X make sure that dlinkmatrix precompute is being
  called once the global observation matrix is ready.

- check for cardinalties in str file

- make sure dlinks are checked somewhere for validity wrt a file

- rething the EMable thing with the virtual functions, might
  be a speedup there, esp. with emIncrement.

- figure out a good way to get (save to disk) most viterbi assignment to 
  mixture variables.

- clean up source directories.

- fix unrolling bug, where it is possible to get an assertion
  failure because of unrolling a network but having  incompatible
  RVs.

- dlinks, make sure we do not point to self

- decision trees, need to deal with the issue with reading them
  in, parallelism, and so on.

- implement other forms of mappings from RV 
    - decision tree (done)
    - hash table
    - direct mapping 

- write MDCPT parameters out in nice order with smart comments.

- dlinkmats, normalize by "previous" covariance matrix, GEM alg

- more triangulation procedures to reduce large clique sizes.

- get switching parents working with triangulation

- print message at start with largest clique (members, and upper bound on
  joint state space)

- reading ascii feature files should not be by line.

X fix bug with small parallel chunks and accumulators being zero

- add option to pass definitions to cpp with cpp arg.

- add some way for DTs to refer to other DTs (i.e., a leaf
  of a DT an continue on using another DT, to make sharing
  easier, and save memory for big DTs).

X option to floor variances when they are read in.
  (for all programs including ascii/binary conversion)

X ascii/binary conversion program can go both ways.

- dynamic DTs, error messages should print cur name as well as base name. 

- make DT such taht even if overlap exists, binsearch will occur.
  (add option to search from the middle outward).
  
- add option to split/vanish top/bottom N mixtures irregardless of that.

- for documentation:
  - good idea to turn on conservative vanishing right after forced splitting.
    This is to make sure that the splitting as a good idea. A forced
    split might not be a good idea. The split Gaussian might 
    dwindle away during training after a split, so keeping conservative
    vanishing will keep that from happening (and will keep the
    variances from being large).
 
- option to turn off all warnings and notes.

- accumulators pretty printed

- don't allocate nextmean next covar until end of em iteration
  since they are contained in component.
  define a new bit in emable to support this (since need
  to know the first time end of em thing is called).

- ability to produce viterbi paths with mixture variables
  using the gaussian mixture objects.

- write a vector version of log(1 + exp(x))

- clean up swap and end EM in gmparams

- add command line option "-format file-type" to the main programs that
  will explain the formats of the various files. For example, if there are
  no gaussian mixtures, does the master file still have to mention them?

- make DTS such that 'default' is not required, and that if
  we have splits w/o a default, then it will have a run-time
  error if we ever get a case that doesn't match the guys in the split

- change range error messages to indcate where the error is
  in the file, etc. where the error occurs (add an extra 
  string argument, etc.).

- check that there are no self loops in dlink strcutres

- add startskip/endskip check

- add link checks

- when no-one left uses a component after vanishing,
  get rid of it (add a 'used' bit perhaps in EMable.h).

- make vanishing stuff vanish w/o a trace (i.e., unused
  component is gone).

- make more conise all the warning messages about vanishing
  (don't need to report all of them, report single summary
   message).   

- check on error check messages, arguments out of order
  in dlink matrix message??? (check with Geoff)

- remove all the using_files stuff in GM.cc

- clean up GM.cc with setExampleStream, and all of that.

- Wed Aug  8 21:58:36 2001 it is still the case that
  the gaussian dimensions are not being checked (since
  we don't know DT leaf values at start time).
  Once tables are in place, we can make sure
  that the tables point to all matching gaussians
  at start time.

- write our own pre-processor (doesn't have space problem
  that cpp has, and also will give standard #line/#file directives).
  Perhaps in perl.

- add tag to command line to add to all cloned objects.

- include global missed increment count in accumulators.

- arguments print default values

- viterbi option so that it prints out max likelyhood of
  one variable summing over all others.

- clean up virtual functions in GMTK_EMable since some of
  the EM ones need not be virtual.

x fix arg description of beam

- for docs, when stdfracs are zero for D and B, and
  when we clonesharemeans, we might make a copy of
  the gaussians when cloning that are exactly the
  same as the parent leading to redundant copy of
  Gaussians. Make sure to mention this in docs.

- support no training names such as gmMx* for foobar*

- state clustering, ala HTK, occupancy counts.

- when segment is to short during training, skip it
  rather than exiting with an error. 


TODO:
 - file formats (table & output file)
 - record phone numbers
 - src id
 - icassp

- accumulate multiple accumulators, give a list of accumulator
  files when numeric range doesn't work to support accumulators
   on different machines.

- go through and making sure all the tying logic and not-training options work.


- change internal class names from ??CPT to the SparseCPT, DenseCPT, etc.

- create a name index type so that DT's can be used for the following.
    - in mappings to GM indexes, DT leaf specifies a relative
      offset in a table rather than in the global collection of GMs. 

    - in MSCPTs, so that row elements of the MSCPT point to
      offsets in a table for the 1dPDFs rather than in the global
      table. Add entry in MSCPT definition in data file.

- a way of adding counts to discrete CPTs without needing to specify an entire accumulator
  file.

- cpp program is determined by environment variable if it exists.

- remove from parser the integer index stuff since string names exist.

- remove all cin/cout and use printf/scanf

- add -version flag to everything.


- from Gang.
1. When I want to print the hidden variables I met the following:

suppose my varList file is the following
   wordLatticeState
   state
   phoneTransition
   wordTransition
and my fileList file is the following
   wordLatticeState.log
   state.log
   phoneTransition.log
   wordTransition.log

The output will put everything in the file wordLatticeState.log.  In that
file the first integer will be wordLatticeState(0), second will be
state(0), so on and so forth.  It didn't create other three files.

2. suggestion

in gmtkViterbi, cppCommand is very useful.  But I if I have a lot macros,
the command line string will be very long.  I wonder whether is a way that
this will take a file of macros.

JB answer: but this can be done using cpps #include in one of the
           files. TODO: add this to documentation.


- add implicit approach to tutorial (from Yimin).

- graphvis and grappa from at&t can visualize graphs very nicely.


- 
>.
>WARNING: Ending EM iteration but 124 rows of MDCPT 'mannerMDCPT' had zero 
>counts. Using previous values for those rows.
>
>Actually, one thing that would be useful would be if it were possible to have 
>a "verbose" option where it tells you which rows had zero counts.
>
------------------------------------------------------------

Tue Jun 18 17:47:44 2002
> >(2)  Does GMTK allow you to use models that aren't strictly probabilistic?  
> >E.g. if I wanted to weight the acoustic model score relative to the language 
> >model, would I be able to do that?  I know that for some purposes I can "fool" 
> >it, as I've done with the feature model, by having multiple observation 
> >variables pointing to the same observations, but that is fairly limited.
> 
> Not at the moment, but that would be really easy to add (and I'd be happy
> to do that for you).
------------------------------------------------------------


FIXED Wed Jun 19 19:27:26 2002

Tue Jun 18 17:51:42 2002
> >(1) I am training a new model, and am getting an error with the new version of gmtkEMtrain but not the old version.  The error occ
> >urs when loading accumulators (but not when training without accumulators), and the message I get is:
> >
> >error in accumulating accumulators: /t/klivescu/aurora/articulatory5/MISC/emtrain.1.log:  
> >EOF occurred in readDouble, file '/t/klivescu/aurora/articulatory5/MISC/acc_file_1.data': MDCPT load accums
> >Loading accumulators from '/t/klivescu/aurora/articulatory5/MISC/acc_file_1.data'
> 
> Hmm. Are you using accumulators that were generated with the old
> version with the new version? I don't think any of that code was
> changed, but it is possible there might have been a bug introduced.

No, the accumulators were generated with the new version.  I ran a
few more experiments to try to figure this out, and it seems that
it has to do with the size of the accumulator files--i.e. it only
happens when the accum files have only a few utterances' worth of
data.  E.g. if I train on 50 sentences broken up into 2 accum files,
it's fine; but when broken up into 10, I get the error.  Perhaps it 
is unhappy about some things not being observed in the accum files?

> That would be good. Could you set up the bug on music and/or orca?

I set up the files on both machines.  On both machines, everything is in
~klivescu/aurora/articulatory5.  The NOTES file contains the command 
lines for the old/new versions (sorry about all the long path names--
the commands were copied directly from script-generated makefiles).  
I think I made everything group-writable, so you should be able to 
run the commands.

Thanks!
Karen

------------------------------------------------------------
FIXED Wed Jun 19 19:27:26 2002

Tue Jun 18 17:51:16 2002
	
(3)  Not so much a question as just letting you know about another error 
(different from the last one) that I got with the new version but not the old 
one.  This one also occurred when combining accumulators.  The error message 
was:

Loading accumulators from '/homes/klivescu/aurora/articulatory7/MISC_NEW/acc_fi
le_1.data'
GMTK_MeanVector.cc:718: failed assertion `emEmAllocatedBitIsSet()'
IOT/Abort trap (core dumped)

This occurred while training a feature model with clustered features.  The only special thing I can think of about this model is that there were a number of Gaussians that I wasn't training (via -objsNotToTrain) because they correspond to impossible combinations of feature values.  I put all the files necessary to replicate the error on music in ~klivescu/aurora/articulatory7.  The NOTES file in that dir has the commands that I ran for both the old and new versions.

-----------------------------------------------------------------
FIXED Wed Jun 19 19:27:26 2002

Wed Jun 19 11:34:25 2002

At the moment, we are not checking for emAmTrainingBitIsSet() in
GMTK_MeanVector.cc, GMTK_DlinkMatrix.cc, and GMTK_DiagCovarVector.cc
in all of the EM routines, except for the swap routine (i.e., if the
bit is not set, we don't swap). The reason for this is as follows.
When sharing is not on, it is fine to check this bit before each EM
routine, and if not set, do nothing. The problem is that with sharing,
when we compute the updates for the shared means, we'll need the
counts for not only the means but also for the covariances, and vice
versa. A similar situation arrises when dlinks are involved. One
solution might be to activate the accumulation if it is seen that
sharing is occuring, the the problem with this is that, at the moment,
we don't know if sharing is occuring until after emINcrement is called
for the 2nd time on teh same mean object. If the bit is off the first
time, we might miss the first accumulation.

The solution now is to compute all the counts for the
means/variances,etc. in all cases, even when the not_training bit is
on, but this can be very wastefull. Another problem is that we need to
save the accumulators when doing parallel training, even when the
means are not being trained. This means that the training bit could be
off, but we are accumulating accumulators for the shared object so the
accumulators need to be saved even when the training bit is off.  This
logic therefore needs to be rethought.

-----------------------------------------------------------------

- get automatic allocation of DenseCPTs working again.


Tue Jul  2 19:35:29 2002
- errors when reading in parameter files should be more informative
  and perhaps say where in the parameeeeeer files the problem is.

Tue Jul  2 19:38:36 2002
- no need for warning about accumulatedProb = 0 for MTCPT

Tue Jul  2 19:53:43 2002
add to documentation something about normalization features
and variance floor. Hints/tips on what to do here.
  - possibly a diff. var floor for each feature vector element/

XX Tue Jul  2 20:24:18 2002
   - add a 'noscore' CPT so that we can do true conditional discrete
     observations, similar to what can be done for discrete observations.

Sun Jul 07 17:16:56 2002
 - go through all parameter reading code to produce better error messages

XX Sun Jul 07 17:16:56 2002
   (e.g., realarray, and all of that, probably eliminate realarray class
    as it's not doing much).

Sun Jul 07 23:40:36 2002
 - idea, for off-line triangulation heuristic, rather than
   min-weight, choose "min dynamic weight." The dynamic
   weight is obtained by running through all possible values
   in the clique and choose the node to eliminate next which
   results in the fewest number of clique instantiations.
   Possible problem. Implementation of edges changes for  
   each utterance, but it is only the decision trees that
   change. 
   Options:
     1) Do this for one possible value of the DTs and 
        hope that this works for the rest
     2) do this for all, and average over the differnet
        DT values (or take min of max, etc.)
     3) have user provide "canonical" DT examples
        that are used for triangulation.
     4) 

  Question of how much to expose user to triangulation issues:
    Goal: try to make it possible for them to experiment with
    better strategies w/o asking them to understand everything,
    but still include it in the tutorial section.
  
Fri Jul 12 23:39:17 2002
  - rewrite issue with di_xxCPT type of CPT objects being
    declared. There should be one CPT object type used in
    the program, and all guys inheret from it. Q: how  
    to do the separate namespace for MDCPTs, MTCPTS, and MSCPTs?
  - this also an issue for mixGaussians. Need to re-think all
    of this.


Sat Jul 13 02:05:27 2002
 - ascii file reading should read in ascii files preprocessed
   by CPP (optionally and by default). Also, the list of files 
   itself should be processed by CPP.

Tue Jul 16 18:38:44 2002
 - when variances get floored, message should also include occupancy
   probability (to see if counts are low)


Thu Jul 18 15:38:36 2002
 - add comment to docs about problem with single quotes in GMTK comments
    because CPP has trouble

XX Thu Jul 18 15:38:51 2002
 - add neg values between -infty and -0 being log probabilities.

Mon Jul 22 13:39:02 2002
 - add neg vals cpt and dpmf to docs,
 - add to docs that normthres can be == 0 to turn it off.

Fri Jul 19 10:11:04 2002
 - add ability to specify initial counts on command line for discrete objects
   (M?CPT, DPMF) during training, to do a form of Laplace smoothing.
   Perhaps similar to obsnottotrain option. 


Fri Jul 19 10:13:22 2002
 - idea. Each gmtk object should have a set of options that can
   be set when the object is defined, rather than in a separate file???

ri Jul 19 11:59:44 2002
 - add karen's MCVR/MCSR comments to the docs

Fri Jul 19 18:48:57 2002
 - use regex library for obs to not train, and other such
   things.

Mon Jul 22 13:40:06 2002
 - idea about triangulation heuristic
   (when doing min weight, when a det. var and its parents
    live in the clique, don't multiply the child's cardinaliiity
    into the clique weights). So, if there is only one
    random parent, entire clique weight = cardinality of
    that parent).

Mon Jul 22 15:15:04 2002
  - when strcutre contains no observations in file, shouldn't
    require obs file (but how to determine unrolling in that case?)

Thu Jul 25 19:57:48 2002
  - add a per sentence like range option to all programs, like
    in the pfile tools. This would pass directly down to the
    file reading utilities.
  - Update the pfile tools to use the new file format.
  

Fri Jul 26 14:52:53 2002
  - add appropriate waring/informational message mechanism,
    so that users can se more/less of the warning information, with
    command line option (e.g., for dets hitting zero, and any
    other funny hacks that occur).
				   

Wed Jul 31 22:04:27 2002
  - actually, rather than laplace smoothing, add an object type 
    that can include initial counts to use for MDCTPs and MSCPTs
    (use  same file format as these, but just include pos integer or fp counts
     rather than probabilities).


Tue Aug  6 22:49:42 2002
  - use email to chiaping on Tue Aug  6 22:49:46 2002 about unity
   score Gaussian -> docs    


Wed Aug  7 13:46:35 2002
 - LM scale factors,
   for vit decoding, give the option to raise the prob of 
   a rand var prob to a power (keep it static for now in
   the structure file).

Fri Aug  9 10:33:17 2002
  - change low level fileparser to when it has an error
    message keep track of the line number & file name of file that it
    is parsing for error messages. Need to parse CPP options
    as well in that case.


Sun Aug 11 18:07:53 2002
 - obsNotToTrain file formats
    - should allow multiple objects on the same line
    - should use a better format (regexpressions, etc.)


Wed Aug 14 14:08:19 2002
    given a word-int map, allow the inclusion of word matrices
    WidMatrix to map to internal GMTK matrices, using loadWordFactors  
    and Katrin's tag-word format. I.e., support observed data
    in the form of words/utterances for a word map.


Mon Sep 30 01:21:02 2002
  - next set of thigns might be redundant with above, but just a check
   1) deterministic CPTs shouldn't have messagtes/notes, etc. about
      not getting any accumulated probability, etc.
   2) error messages with MSCPTs, MDCPts, use new names


Wed Dec  4 19:39:41 2002
  - ascii file formats for data files, add bit in domentation that
    one frame per line, and fix error message on line 1272 in GMTK_GM.cc
    (see email from Au@hk).


Tue Dec 17 13:31:36 2002
>2. Usually LM scale factor is accompanied with the insertion penalty, i.e.
>
>		scale * log P + penalty
>
>  I think, including insertion penalty would be quite useful for 
>  incorporating LMs with GMTK.
 (actually, do the switching variable scale/penalty stuff).
Email from Dec 18th
> A way, then, of getting an insertion penalty effect is to have a
> switching scale and penalty, syntax could be:
> 
>       weight: 
>         value 1.0 value 0.0     // scale = 1, penalty = 0 
>       | value 5.0 value 3.0 ;   // scale = 5, penalty = 3
> 
> which mimics the conditional parents notation. In this case, it uses
> the first scale,penalty when the switching parent is in its first
> region, and the 2nd when the switching parent is in its second region.
> So, when it switches in the true bigram (meaning a word transition
> occured).
> 
> We could have time-dependent scale,penalty by doing:
> 
>       weight: 
>         observed 0:0 observed 1:1
>       | observed 2:2 observed 3:3 ;
> 
> where it would be assumed that observations 0-3 contain only scales
> and penalties. 
> 
> Thoughts??

That's funny because I was about to ask you what happens when you have switching
 parents and whether you can change the weight for the different branches of the
 switch.  I didn't think about the penalty but that would be very useful too.  T
he syntax above looks good to me, except I might make it more explicit about whi
ch is the scale and which is the penalty, e.g.

weight:  scale value 1.0 penalty observed 0:0 ;


Thu Dec 19 17:36:22 2002
  - topological sort loop detection should indicate
    which node is involved in a loop.

Sun Dec 22 21:09:32 2002
 - unrolling routine should not allow for P to reference into
   E and E to reference into P (i.e., P and E can not have
   a parent on the other side of a chunk).
   Why?
    - then the interface method no longer makes sense. This is
      because that constrained triangulation for DBNs
      is implicitely assumed by the interface algorithm (i.e.,
      nodes up until the 'face' are elimiated first). With
      links accross chunks, then the face might live
      in both the chunk and E at the same time, might
      cause large cliques, and would make triangulation
      more difficult. 

      Note that we could have a mode that allowed for this,
      if it used the old strategy of first unrolling the
      network, then moralizing triangulating, and then
      doing inference.
      Idea: since we'll need such a mode for unrolling
          by 0 cases anyway, we could use it for the
          case when E links into P (and vice versa).


    - Makes the concept of unrolling more difficult. If
      links could span accross a chunk, then depending
      on the unrolling amount, a link with child in
      say P might at one time
      link into a portion of the unrolling chunk, at
      another time, might link into a node in E.
    - update: Thu Dec 26 03:19:08 2002
       perhaps allow for this to occur when using
       the unroll graph and then triangulation mode (e..g,
       the same mode that works for snakes will work for here as well).


Sun Dec 22 21:12:43 2002
  - idea: wrap-around mode?
     i.e., allow for negative indices at the beginning of a graph
     to link into the end (i.e., P can link to E using negative)?? 
  - but this would have same problems as linking from P to E
    in note above.


Tue Dec 24 00:25:18 2002
  - find best {left,right} interface should have the option
    to judge the quality of the interface not by size
    but also by weight (which includes deterministic 
    variables).


Tue Dec 24 08:02:50 2002  
   for min weight heuristic
	    // TODO: should also look at if this is a sparse CPT,
	    // and if so, multiply by the average density (number of non-zeros)
	    // of the CPT rather than the entire cardinality. For a very
	    // sparse CPT, for example, using just the cardinality
	    // is *very* conservative. 
   a sparce CPT can provide this estimate itself of the
   average cardinality. E.g., it can compute over
   all parent values number of columns that are non-zero,
   and take average, that is the 'effective' cardinality.
   Can do this by looking at sparcePMF.length() field
   on line 228 of GMTK_MSCPT.cc.


Tue Dec 24 08:26:10 2002
   define a cardinality of a CPT baesd on the
   average 2^entropy of the node, under the
   assumption that pruning will remove stuff below
   those values that are not significant.
   This is another heuristic to add (and should be
   controllable via command line parameter).

Tue Dec 24 13:58:16 2002
  - for snake structure, can have a module that
    still does regular unconstrained triangulation and
    unrolls and triangulates for each length (in that
    case, snake will be better)


Tue Dec 24 13:58:48 2002
  - for min-fill, min-weight, etc., when there
    is a tie, back off to constrained triangulation
    (e.g., eliminate the earliest node first, or
     a random node selected from among the earliest
     nodes)


Wed Dec 25 02:09:25 2002
  - with triangulation heuristics, when a tie occurs
    then use another heuristic (i.e., with a tie with
    min weight, then use min fill in)

Wed Dec 25 12:50:41 2002
  - also include an anytime triangulation algorithm
    exhaustive search. It should occasionally
    print out the percent searched so far, and
    should accept a SIGUSR2 to terminate search
    so far and take answer. Also, should
    include an argument that is the time (in days
    and hours) to compute triangulation for, and
    stop after that amount of time.
    

Thu Dec 26 02:16:36 2002
  - fix: core dump issue when graph is not connected.
    (i.e., when chunk is not connected to itself)


Thu Dec 26 02:21:28 2002
  - Chris Bartels Todo:
    - write a class Anytime_Triangulation
       that has same interface as basicTriangulation routine
    - write an anytime exhaustive search triangulatio
    - get MCS working with current graphs, so we can
      verify that graphs are indeed triangulated.


Thu Dec 26 03:18:13 2002
  - include something indocumentation about
    cpp0: ....
    errors, and that these are generated from cpp not gmtk.


Mon Dec 30 05:16:04 2002
  - this is probably mentioned somewhere above, but
    change fileParser.{cc,h} to print out line numbers when
    there is an error message, and also to understand
    cpp's filename and line number mechanism (for ascii files
    and when they are processed with cpp).

Fri Jan  3 19:48:46 2003
  - this is an old todo item taken out of foce.
  // snake structure with constrained elimination
  // will ruin the clique_size = 2 property
  //     of the 'snake' structure. The todo is to get this working 
  //     with that (and similar) structures.
  /*
   *     idea: make complete components in C_l *only* if they
   *           are connected via nodes/edges within either (P + left_C_l)
   *           or preceeding C.
   *           What we will then have is a collection of cliques for 
   *           the interface(s). In this case, we glue together
   *           the corresponding sets of cliques. Right interface
   *           algorithm should be similar (and use E rather than P).
   *           But might both left and right interface need to be used in the
   *           same repeated chunk in this case to get clique_size=2???
   *      alternatively (and easier): for snake, just use the unconstrained
   *           triangulation method (which works perfectly for snake).
   *          


Sat Jan  4 17:39:20 2003$
  - build utilities to convert (at least partially) from
    other standard GM network file formats to GMTK and
    vice versa. See the 
    Bayesian Network Repository page.
        

Tue Jan  7 12:24:16 2003
  - remove 'observation' as keyword for weight and just use
    observed.

Mon Jan 13 13:31:34 2003
  - BUG: when we have a sparse cpt in a parameter file that
    refers to a name 'global' for a collection object, that
    object does not exist since loadGlobal() was called in the
    gmtk programs last (after other trainable and master files
    have been called). 

Mon Jan 13 13:32:31 2003$
  - get rid of MSCPT, MDCPT, and MTCPT messages. In sparce CPT
    error messages, it says MTCPT when it should refer to sparce CPTs.
    Fri Jan 23 13:17:05 2004: change all internal program variables
     away from using MTCPT, MDCPT, etc. also
   
Mon Jan 13 16:54:33 2003
  - make sure in documentation that it says that dlink feature index 
    values are for absolute locations with respect to the
    feature files and not relative locations, relative
    to the feature range given in the .str file (if this
    is not done already).
      - parent variables are absolute, with absolute feature locations
       given in dlink definition
      - child variables are relative, where relative location is given
        starting with feature range given in .str file.

Mon Jan 13 17:18:17 2003
  - Fix bad error message, 'Error: upper n >- limit n in range string' when training range does
    not match the range of utterance numbers in the observation file.


Thu Jan 30 19:15:59 2003
  - optimization
   right now, updating of Gausisans during mean and variance updating as follows:
    *covars_p += (*f_p)*(*f_p)*fprob;
    *nextMeans_p += (*f_p)*fprob;
   but where the two lines of code occur in different files, and so
   it can't re-use the common subexpresion (*f_p)*fprob
  - TODO, write a routine that can update both at the same time,
    probably best way to do this is to add a bit of code to emIncrement
    in GMTK_DiagGaussian and GMTK_LinMeanCondGaussian for this purpose.



Fri Jan 31 00:30:30 2003
  - add a '-debug' option that prints various status
    messages depending on the '-debug' number.

Mon Feb 03 14:45:49 2003
  - might be above, but add the option to
    unroll more times of the C chunk and triangulate that
    rather than just one time (this would put more constraints
    on the number of allowable frames for a P,C,E graph).

Sun Feb 23 17:04:32 2003
  - have exponential partition algorithm take a SIGUSR1 to terminiate
    what it has done so far and continue with the best it has found so far.

Sun Feb 23 17:05:10 2003
  - Have exponential partition algorithm also parallize (so that space
    can be broken into chunks in some way and have search run in parallel).

Sun Feb 23 17:12:53 2003
  - when using with an observation set that does not match what unrolling
    can do for a given graph and triangulation, give options
      1) left justify, 2) right justify, 3) center, 4) unconstraints
    Make it clear that when obs length is too short, it will do unconstrainted
     (or perhaps even backoff to simpler triangulation scheme, one that
      does not do any partially unrolled triangulation).
     call it "semi-constrained triangulation"
     (good for certain graphs, Brian's, Kevin's, but still doesn't 
      work for snake, the optimal graph is fully unconstrained).


Fri Feb 28 00:09:13 2003
  - not a todo, but rather a note. When the final reported
    weight is not one of the ones in the boundary alg search (and it
    is lower), it is probably the intial score (before the boundary
    alg. is run). keywords: final, face heuristic, exponential algorithm,
    weight not same, different weight, first weight, final weight

Wed Mar 05 19:45:16 2003
  - also allow language models to be specified in W3 XML format 
    see http://www.w3.org/TR/ngram-spec/
  - allow this as well as the DARPA format above.
  - 

Sat Mar  8 00:00:26 2003
  - another arguments.cc bug, in this case with -argsFile and then
    missing required option later, default argument values are printed
    incorrectly.

Sat Mar  8 16:56:48 2003
  - Write an emacs editing mode file for gmtk .str files.


Sun Mar  9 14:42:11 2003 
  - fix arguments.cc to not use C++ iostream
    and give usage() an optional message.

Sun Mar 09 19:00:59 2003
  - random variable should be super class, and 
    subclasses should add things like neighbors, etc.
    I.e., might make parent class of random variable is all the parser
    should want to deal with.

Sat Mar 15 22:31:31 2003
  - the issue of setting objects to not train, i.e., when A) a mean
    of a Gaussian is trained but a covariance is not, or when B) a covariance
    of a Gaussian is trained but not a mean. In case B, the
    covariance update should really be relative to the existing untrained mean,
    not the new mean which is accumulated, computed, and then discarded.
    The no-train thing should be re-thought out.

Sat Mar 15 22:33:27 2003
 - suggestions from Chris Bartels
	Jeff,
	
	You had mentioned that I should keep track of ideas I had to help with
	GMTK debugging and usability as I used it.  Here is the list.
	
	Debugging Support:

	Display the values for observation variables for the first several frames.
	The user can use this to verify that they are indexing into their data
	files correctly and have the byte swapping set properly.
	
	Allow the user to specify the values of the random variables in some sort
	of text file, then GMTK can display the values of each of the
	deterministic variables based on this.  For example, with the aurora
	based graphs the user would supply a text file of state transitions which
	would just look something like '0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1' and GMTK would print
	out 9 frames of variables, and because the model can't complete in just 9
	frames give some sort of error message saying so.
	
	Start an FAQ for common problems such as the byte swapping and the
	'skipping example due to zero probability' that I was seeing.
	
	Bugs:
	
	In one of my decision tree files I used some #define constants but this
	did not work nor did it give me an error message.
	
	When I was using the decision trees with the #define constants I was
	sometimes getting core dumps rather than an error message and an elegant
	exit.  When I didn't get the core dump it looked like my current state
	value which controlled the DPMFs I was training only was taking on one
	value.
	
	Usability suggestions:

	Give it the ability to generate initial Gaussian parameters like it
	currently can do with DPMFs.
	
	I nice GUI with integrated editing and debugging features.



Sat Mar 22 21:02:06 2003
  - environment variables for:
     - cpp (or some preprocessor) command and/or path
     - default cpp (or preprocessor) options


Thu Apr 24 13:36:20 2003
  - Add ability to have hidden variables take distributions
    from observation files (so that the distribution might
    change from frame to frame, making the distribution 
    itself an observation, the the variable using that
    distribution is still hidden). Distribution can for example
    come from a NN.
    Sat Jun 14 19:48:34 2003: This allows for "hybrid" like systems
       (where NNs can supply distributions over observed variables),
       but also allows for simulation of situations where
       one has observed continuous parents with hidden discrete children.
       Learning, of course, has to be done separately (but need to think
       more about this).

Fri May 09 17:42:07 2003
  - add automaticly existing observed variable frame, so users
    can condition on frame(0), frame(-1), etc. which gives 
    the frame number in an utterance (and so users don't need 
    to have a counter for this).
    Sun Feb 22 14:45:15 2004: update, also add length(n) variable
    that for all n returns the length of the current utterance.


Fri May 09 18:52:17 2003
  - assertion failed when dlink matrices exist but are not used by
    a Gaussian component, but then the accumulator tries to accumulate
    the dlink matrix but finds that it's em stuff has not been allocated.
    this happens when accumulating externally from acc file. 
    Should report an error when dlink matrices exist in data files
    that are not being used by any gaussian component, since we might
    get this error when tring to accumulate the dlink matrices without
    their em stuff existing.
    TODO: possibly have automatic allocation of em structures via when
    we accumulate them rather than the other way around.
    
    
Fri May 23 15:42:30 2003
  - fix argument code so that rather than giving warnings on argument type errors, it
    gives true errors.
 

XX Wed May 28 14:45:38 2003
    - perhaps this is done already, but when checking for loops and valid structures,
     do toploigical sort on all of 
       - basic template (unroll(0))
       - unroll(1)
       - unroll(2)
     There is some email from me to chris on this topic, look for that.
    DONE: Sat Jul  5 20:49:37 2003 (JB)
    Wed Jan 21 23:25:44 2004: need to unroll by from 1 to number of vars in C partition
      to get this working.

Tue Jun 03 23:19:31 2003
  - need to add a check for edges spanning from P to E *after* moralization.
    This can happen with backwards dlinks.
    (i.e., consider fig 7 graph in uai03 paper, if only a three frame
     template is used and graph is moralized, then unrolled
     chunk will have edges from P to E).


Tue Jul 01 17:36:05 2003
  - go through all file reading code and insert the is.fileName()  (and ideally a line number
    as well) for all error reports about that file.

Fri Jul 04 00:39:18 2003
  - make the MCS implementation truely O(n+e) raather than O(N^2)

Sat Jul  5 17:30:27 2003
  - make sure that certain core dumps with M>1 on some of the graphs
    are due to running out of memory.
  - Implement a fixed upper bound memory usage, and turn off memoize when
    that limit is reached, so that memory usage does not grow unboundedly. 

Sat Jul  5 17:34:38 2003
  - in timer code comments, give a bunch (lots) of examples of valid timer strings.
  - include these examples in documentation.

Tue Jul 08 15:19:03 2003
  - improve error message in GMTK_FileParser.cc
	  error("Error: RV \"%s\" at frame %d (line %d), num parents cond. %d different than required by %s \"%s\".\n",

Thu Jul 10 16:25:06 2003
  - set up GMTK web page with links to all papers, etc.

Thu Jul 10 16:25:23 2003
  - BMM link adaptation

Thu Jul 10 16:25:33 2003
  - Adding DARPA format Language Model CPTs

Thu Jul 10 16:25:33 2003
  - Adding FLM Language Model CPTs

Sat Aug 23 15:52:47 2003
  - see if it helps to do log(size)+weight rather than just weight
    in triangulation code. 10^weight is just number of "rows" in the 
    table, but 10^(log(size)+weight) is full table size (with zeros 
    removed).
        - this will probably be moot now that packed clique values
          are used.

Sat Sep  6 18:24:29 2003
  - add a flush buffer mode to debug.h so that output when error
    occurs doesn't get lost.

Sun Sep  7 00:34:12 2003
  - fix bug with partition algorithm
    with graph parents_before_after.str and similar such things.


Sun Oct 12 23:06:28 2003
  - add an extra internal variable tehat is constant and
    gives an integer corresponding to the total number of frames
    in an utterance. It is available at every frame, but
    is always the same value for an utterance.
  - add another variable that gives the frame number of
    the variable in quesiton (i.e., frame(0) is the current
    frame, frame(-1) is the previous frame, etc.). In
    first frame of template can't do frame(t<0), and in
    last frame of template can't do frame(t>0)
  - Possibly tie this in with the observation matrix by having
    variables that:
      - give number of changes in a discrete stream of features
      - length of original unexpanded number of frames, before
        obs matrix has done upsampling, etc.
  - Make a general module to add such variables.

Wed Oct 15 19:18:58 2003
  - allow for frames without variables to do multirate and 
    automatic downsampling.

Sun Oct 19 13:36:47 2003
  - Should either add "noisy-or" and "noisy-and" implementations 
    of CPTs, and their multivariate generalizations, or
    mention in documentation how they can easily be obtained  
    using a deterministic 'or' function with grand-parents
    the original variables.
    Add variational training to this sort of model.


Sun Nov  2 21:49:43 2003
 - make other variables available in DT formulas, such as:
    - current frame number of child
    - total number of frames in current utterance.
    - 

Sun Nov  4 22:32:50 2003:
Triangulation idea: 
  - add all deterministic ancestors as neighbors when going from DN to UGM.
Before triangulation:
 do:
   1 for each node, if any of its parents are
     deterministic, add those parents as neighbors .
   2 If any such newly added neighbors are themselves deterministic,
     add those new neighbors' parents as neighbors
     If no new such newly added neighbors are det, then stop.
   3. Goto 2.
  - Possibly do similar thing for sparse CPT nodes,
    i.e., add sparse ancestors if their effective cardinality
    is small enough.
    

Sun Nov  9 22:35:40 2003:
 Other things for inference
   - for viterbi decoding mode, don't store the probabilities for
     all time, just for the current and next clique, only   
     store the back pointers.
   - Also have a mode where only the back poitners for a particular
     "word" (variable, set of variables) are stored rather than
     all variables? (see what this would mean).


Mon Dec 29 16:40:08 2003

 - nodes assigned to cliques, there are several categories.

 1) node is iterated by a separator comming into the clique
    iterate over: only values that exist in all incomming
    separators.
 2) node is actually assigned to this clique, which means
    that its parents must either be iterated before we iterate
    over this node
    iterate over: only values with non-zero probability.
 3) a node that exists because one or more of its children need 
    the values of the node, so we need to 
    iterate over: all possible values of node


Wed Dec 31 17:45:52 2003
  need to do something with
     1) continuous nodes (which are observations)
     2) discrete observed nodes (ideally, break the graph).

  cpts have their own value which gets set and then
  copied over again to RV. Make it such that CPT uses
  RV val directly rather than copying value over many times.
 

Sun Jan 11 06:53:27 2004
 - Go through all code and change variables to use
   unsigned when variables are really unsigned
 - Look for machine specific assumptions since problems
   might arise when compiling on 64b machines.
 - when this is done, remove all (unsigned**) casts
   in GMTK_MaxClique.cc in call to pack()

Tue Jan 13 00:07:02 2004
 - start doing many subclasses of RV.
   Right now there are virtual functions in RV and its
   derivatives that are doing checks that could
   be setup by an appropriate subclass that
   is created by the file parser. For example,
     1) the weight stuff 
     2) switching parent stuff
     3) etc.
    (i.e., if we're paying the cost of a virtual
     function, we might as well switch right
     to a function that does exactly what we want).
 - make a packed bit length member function for GMTK_PackedCliqueValue.h  
 - for hash tables and dynamic arrays, and when doing multiple iterations, use simple 
   learning algorithm to decide starting size (rather than fixed constants), 
   to avoid extraneous memory accesses.


Sat Jan 17 14:38:59 2004
  - rewrite RV class hierarchy so that virtual function cost
    is all we pay for prob, begin(), next(), etc.
  - all RVs currently use STL, change to use sarrays.
  - summary: new features to add:
     - inference features
          - viterbi decoder and word only (or variable only) 
            backtrace, generalizing LVCSR decoders (see decoder papers).
          - n-best and lattice
          - loopy
          - importance sampling
          - variational inference
     - usability features
          - ARPA LMs and FLMs
          - non-linear BMMs 
          - smoothing for CPTs in EM
          - generalized parameter adaptation directly within GMTK
          - ??? (something I'm forgetting).
          - generalized probability weights/exponents
          - decision tree formulas (Chris)
          - integrate in new obs code.

     - theory/algorithms
          - switching parents in inference in forward/backward
          - characterize nets which require particular M and S
          - triangulation for nets with sparse CPTs (Chris)       
     - tutorials
          - update and get aurora tutorial into CVS
          - get Karim's fully implicit tutorial integrated in
          - write other tutorials for
              - language modeling
              - pronunciation modeling
          - integrate in small test suite examples (exp1, exp2, etc.) which will
            both serve as tutorial material and something to
            test things out to ensure compiled version works.  


Sun Jan 18 02:11:09 2004
  - in boundary search, traverse to parents of children
    in next partition first, to try to find something useful sooner.

Wed Jan 21 23:22:18 2004
  - pre-allocation size
    - have a function that computes the clique weight relative to the
      junction tree and the JT root, one that includes the
      notion of separator driven clique iterations.
    - Use this notion of weight to compute a value for initial allocation
      size. Also, use 'beam' value to help guide how large the first
      allocation should be (if beam is large, we should allocate
      a smaller first size).


Fri Jan 23 16:02:09 2004
   - consider writing a parameter file format in XML.


Fri Jan 23 18:32:41 2004
   - add a section to the documentation about the "design" of decision
     trees, how there can be good ways and bad ways to do it, and how 
     bad ways can be slower. Give examples.
   - explain in documentation that a DT's job is to map every possible
     input variable values (each input variable can have values
     from 0:(card-1)) to a valid output value (from 0:(card-1)). Not
     all output values need to be produced, but all possible input
     variable values (the cross-product) must be considered, or otherwise
     you might either get 1) unexpected results since a value
     occurs you didn't expect, or 2) hopefully, you'll get a runtime error 
     saying that the output value is invalid.


Tue Jan 27 15:56:38 2004
  - have observation files also be able to read streams
    of words. The words are converted to integers using
    one of the internal word hash tables, where the
    hash tables were built using some vocabulary.
  - Perhaps look into "perfect" hashing functions for
    vocabularies.

Tue Jan 27 18:31:29 2004
  - add note in documentation about how cardinalities
    of 2^n have the  least efficient use of bits
    whereas cards of 2^n-1 have the most efficient
    use of their allocated space (assuming in each
    case tha the variables use all their values with
    non-zero probability).

Wed Jan 28 20:40:22 2004
  - write GMTK's own tokenizer for .str files to avoid problems
    with flex library, etc.


Fri Jan 30 19:17:21 2004
  - triangulater, add option to just re-triangulate
    one of P, C, or E.
    Allows for parallelism. 
    DONE, but need way to merge different trifiles together.
    create program: gmtkMergeTrifiles


Sat Jan 31 11:45:06 2004
  - arguments code, when printing out default arguments, it
    prints out the ones after they potentially have been modified om
    command line, i.e.,
         foo -arg1 a -arg2 b -arg3 c -helpk
    will print out default values of a for arg 1 b for arg2 regardless of
    what they were in program. Fix this as it is confusing. 

Sat Jan 31 19:01:06 2004
  - get new inference working with disconnected networks.


Mon Feb  2 23:41:53 2004
  - figure out a way to have discrete RVs. in different
    frames be observed or hidden (i.e., perhaps
    the hidden/observed status of a RV can be obtained
    from the observation file for a given utterance in
    some nice way). This would need to gel with
    the new RV class hierarchy. 

Mon Feb  9 21:07:55 2004
  - fix bug where
      If E = empty in right interface case, and where
           resulting E only contains interface nodes (which might
           result in a clique of size one if the interface has one node)
      If P = empty in left interface case (symmetric case as above).
   - probable solution. Allow for P or E to still be empty in .trifile.
   - other (possibly easy) solution: when P (or E) are empty, unroll an extra
    time to create a P' (or E') that is not empty. 


Mon Feb  9 21:11:40 2004
  - fix bug where buggy graph has core dump in triangulation code:
   frame : 0 {
   variable : state {
      type: discrete hidden cardinality 3 ;
      switchingparents: nil;
      conditionalparents: nil using DenseCPT("state0");
   }
   variable : obs  {
      type: continuous observed 0:5 ;
      switchingparents: nil;
      conditionalparents: state(0) using mixture 
            collection(CN) mapping("DT::state2obs");
   }
   }
   frame : 1 {
   variable : state {
      type: discrete hidden cardinality 3 ;
      switchingparents: nil;
      conditionalparents: state(-1) using DenseCPT("state1_with_state_pars");
   }
   variable : obs {
      type: continuous observed 0:5 ;
      switchingparents: nil;
      conditionalparents: state(0) using mixture 
           collection(CN) mapping("DT::state2obs");
   }
  }
  chunk 0:0
     
  This should probably check that unrolled graph produces a connected graph.
  (or allow for unconnected graphs).


Thu Feb 12 11:59:35 2004
  - also allow triangulation routine to take a SIGUSR1 to stop searching
    and report back what it has found so far.
  - add check pointing in triangulation code (say every 10 minutes, save  
    the best .trifile so far found).


Sat Feb 14 22:09:30 2004
In backward pass during EM, we might have zero probs that were only
discovered in backward pass, so check for 0 (or threshold) before
doing EM update. Should have an EM pruning threshold as well.
So, we'll have three pruning thresholds:
   1) cbeam - clique beam
   2) sbeam - separator beam
   3) ebeam - EM posterior probabiltiy beam, below this we don't
              bother to update.


Wed Feb 18 12:11:08 2004
  - have a program that goes through and checks all DTs for all
    values of all parents and ensures that all children are
    valid values for each location a DT is used. Possibly
    do this for all iterable DTs as well. 
    this will
      1) help reduce bugs by telling a user when DTs are problem
         before running the program.
      2) speed things up as dynamic checking can be removed.


Wed Feb 18 15:12:25 2004
  - add mention of Chiaping email from today about splitting
    to manual.

Wed Feb 18 23:57:26 2004
Check the following and use the one that is faster.
> Do you know if:
>
>   const  set<RandomVariable*>::iterator it;
>   const  set<RandomVariable*>::iterator it_end = foo.end();
>   for (it=foo.begin(); it != it_end; it ++) { ...}
>
> is indeed faster than:
>
>   const  set<RandomVariable*>::iterator it;
>   for (it=foo.begin(); it != foo.end(); it ++) { ...}
>
> I've been noticing it in your code, and if it is faster, will want to
> start converting over.


Thu Feb 19 23:41:00 2004
  - tree-structured lexicon: it should be possible to code
    this up using sparse CPTs, and use the same standard inference procedure.
    Should investigate this.


Sat Feb 21 19:11:22 2004
  - investigate and use faster hash functions for the vhash stuff.
   -  Look at Bob Jenkin's hash function
      and the FNV (Fowler/Noll/Vo) Hash. 

Sun Feb 22 14:36:17 2004
  - Allow soft evidence to come from an observation
    file
  - Allow probability distributions each frame to
    come from an observation file, so that distributions
    can come from NN output probabilities.
      - variable w/o parents can get its distribution from
        observation file. Define a new CPT that
        obtains its probabilities in this way.
      - NN probabilities in some sort of conditional distribution.
     In other words:
          - time-inhomogeneous CPTs (for vars without parents)
          - time-inhomogeneous CPTs for one parent, and observed binary children set to 1.
            i.e., we have a --> b,  where b is observed == 1 , and the
            score comes from hidden variable a, as P(b|a) = score_from_file(a).
  - This functionality should subsume that of hybrid decoders.

Tue Feb 24 11:01:06 2004
  - add an option to either sort or not sort the separators either
    as not at all, max overlap, or min weight, and make available 
    on the command line.


Mon Mar  1 23:09:05 2004
  - cpp include files should be smarter about the current working directory.
    Currently, if a file says include "foo.file", it uses the users
    current working directory even if the file was specified using a long path name.
    Try to pre-pend the path to the file somehow (or add that to CPP's -I options by
    default)
     - include in documentation that user can give "-I path" options in the -cppOptions
       commands in GMTK.
     - Use environment variable for GMTK, GMTK_CPP_INCLUDE to include other
       paths for GMTK. 


Mon Mar  1 23:41:09 2004
  - in DT leaf formulas, add
     variables fp0 fp1 fp2 for frame numbers of parents 0 1 2, and fc for frame number of child.
  - also, be able to add cardinality of both parent and child.
  - also, be able to add number of frames in current segment.
    (this might make moot the need for special internal variables, as it
    it is easy to have RVs with DTs to do this.) Make sure that we can have
    RVs without parents and with a MTCPT that always returns a single value,
    and that can have cardinality 1 (and so should never be placed in any clique
    value, since it is essentially another way of doing an observation, but here
    the observation changes each frame).


Mon Mar  1 23:50:32 2004
  - variables with card = 1 should be treated as observations, and triangulation
    code and methods should pay attention to this. 


Sat Mar  6 14:52:42 2004
  - let cbeam and sbeam come from an observation vector, so we can have dynamic beam pruning.
  - Also, give a file with a beam schedule based on percentage (i.e.,
    cbeam argument can either be a fp value, or a name of a file that has something like:
        0-10: beam1
        11-50: beam2
        51-95: beam3
        96-100: beam4
    where 0-10 says the first 10% of the file, 11-50 the next 39%, and so on.
  - also have a beam for each clique in some way (i.e., perhaps a growth function'
    so that larger cliques have larger beams, etc.)

Sat Mar  6 19:52:15 2004
 - write an any-time script that iterates for a given amount of time:
   1) generate a random triangulation (meaning it chooses
      one of the triangulation heuristics at random).
   2) run one utterance of inference, timing the result
      (kill process if it takes too long).
 - Stores the N-best triangulation files by run-time. 

 
Sun Mar  7 14:13:59 2004
  - allow parameters to be read in in any order, and do not only backward
    but forward reference to items not yet defined. Do a final pass
    over parameters to resolve all references.

Sun Mar  7 19:41:24 2004
  - with '-verb 100' option, set up so that some form of indenting is
    working within a clique for RV assignment printing (easier to read).

X- Mon Mar  8 01:47:26 2004
   - fix two bugs that Karim found around this date (see gmtk mail)
     1) DT leaves with p0 rather than (p0)
     2) cliques with all obs, see karim learning string-edit distance example.

Mon Mar  8 12:27:41 2004
  - in DT leaves, add an abs() function.
  1) absolute value function abs(expression)
  2) unary negation
  3) floor, ceil, round (implement without floating point)
  2) new variables: 
       - cardinality of child: c
       - current frame number of parent: fp0, fp1, fp2, etc.
       - current frame number of children: fc
       - number of frames in current utterance: nframes
        
Mon Mar  8 20:48:40 2004
  Allow hidden continuous mixtures, and do inference simply
  by (importance) sampling from that distribution (so it is like discrete).
  This should be easy to get working with new inference code.

Wed Mar 10 21:56:35 2004
  - change to allow cliques with all observations, and all observed graphs. T?his
    should be fairly easy, just do less "error" checking.
  - change to allow disconnected frames (i.e., just don't send a message between partitions).
  - add a feature where we topologically sort nodes in a clique based on
    expected cost. I.e., if a deterministic node uses a complicated DT, then
    it should come as early as possible in a clique to avoid redundantly calling
    the expensive DT. Cheap DTs can go later in the clique order (i.e., extend
    topological sort with continous vars first to be topological based on expected cost.
    Perhaps use DT description length as an estimate of the DT cost, or perhaps  
    just number of DT leaf nodes. 



Fri Mar 12 17:13:42 2004
 - instead of unity score CPTs and Gaussians, produce alpha-score CPts and Gaussian
   where alpha can be any value.

Sat Mar 13 18:45:03 2004
 - docs: place note in documentation about FPEs, and to first make sure that
   you don't have any NaNs in the feature files (since this will
   cause FPEs in GMTK and people might think this is a GMTK bug).
   You can use 'od' to check the status of raw binary feature files.
   I.e., 'od -f' will print things out in 32-bit floats. You can
   also use od to skip a bit (say if it is a 12-bite header).
   Also mention the use of obsPrint (the new pfile functions Karim
   did). All should go in documentation
 - Have obs file check for NaNs on input and report error (todo for Karim's
   new version of obsfile).


Sat Mar 13 22:24:53 2004
  - implement another form of pruning, where you provide the
    maximum number of clique or separator entries that survive.
    Number should be able to be specified either as percent (relative
    to the current total) or as an absolute number.
    - Note: clique pruning will be easy, but separator pruning
      in this case will be a bit more difficult.

Sun Mar 14 23:04:25 2004
  - make 1-page reference card for GMTK DTs with everything from syntax, rules, tips for speeding up,
    and all possible formulas, etc.


Sun Mar 21 05:24:38 2004
  - in inner inference loops, rather than have:
        rv->begin()
            computeProb
        while (rv->next())
  - have rv->next() also provide the probability, thereby
    avoiding yet another virtual function call (which is expensive). 
    i.e., have rv->next(prob) return true if prob was filled with the next probability.
   

Thu Mar 25 17:04:41 2004
  - define a pre-defined CPP variable that gives the major and minor version of GMTK.

Fri Mar 26 14:17:15 2004
  - make output word strings compatible with NIST word error scoring tools.
    In general, look at NIST tools, and make GMTK output as compatible as possible with them.

Fri Mar 26 17:38:32 2004
  - script to convert from an easy rep. of a SparseCPT into single GMTK sparseCPT in one file.

Sat Mar 27 15:14:17 2004
  - create a .gmtktriangulaterc file for common triangulation options.
    In addition, have an ENV variable for this purpose.

Sat Mar 27 20:57:04 2004
 - island algorithm should interact with gaussian component cache, in that
   cache memory should be re-claimed for different islands so that
   we don't use O(T) mem for cache but rather O(log T) mem.

Sat Mar 27 21:08:06 2004
 - add bit about gaussian component cache to docs. 


Tue Mar 30 13:08:33 2004
  - add a noCPTCheck option, to allow cpts to read in non-probabilties, etc.
    Figure out how to get working with log probs, etc.

Fri Apr  2 12:41:23 2004
  - look into issue of n-P triangulation being different for different n
    (see email from Ozgur today regarding that).


Sun Apr  4 17:16:40 2004
  - not really a TODO, but an idea. Another completely different way of doing
    inference would be to off-line compile out all cliques into single
    integer states, and then have all loops be single iterations through
    all non-zero prob states (conditioned on current previous states).
    This would need to go through all utterances, and do this separately
    for each, since each utterance having a different DT would mean
    that there can't be one single compiled version (this still could be
    done offline, and stored on disk). 
 

